.TH QUOTATOOL 8 "1999 - 2012" "version 1.5.0"
.SH NAME
quotatool \- manipulate filesystem quotas
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quotatool
[-u [:]uid | -g [:]gid] [-b | -i] [-r | -l NUM | -q NUM] [-nvR] [-d]
.I filesystem
.br
.B quotatool
(-u | -g) (-b | -i) -t TIME [-nv]
.I filesystem
.br
.B quotatool
[-hV]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B quotatool
is a tool for manipulating filesystem quotas.  Depending on the
commandline options given, it can set hard or soft limits on block and
inode usage, set and reset grace periods, for both users and (if your
system supports this) groups.  The filesystem to set the quota on is
given as the first (and only) non-option element, and it is either the
block special file (i.e /dev/sda3) or the mount point (i.e. /home) for
the filesystem.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-u [[:]uid]
Set user quotas
.TP
-g [[:]gid]
Set group quotas
.LP
.IR uid
and
.IR gid
are either the numerical ID of the user or group, or its
name in the
.B /etc/passwd
and
.B /etc/group
files. Prefix
.IR :
allows using numerical uid/gid not present in /etc/passwd or /etc/group.
.TP
-b
Set block quotas [default]
.TP
-i
Set inode quotas
.LP
The -b and -i  options are persistent -- they stay in effect until
they are overridden.
.TP
-R
Only raise quotas, never lower. Makes sure you don't accidentally lower quotas for a user/group.
.TP
-t TIME
Set the system-wide grace period to TIME.  TIME consists
of an optional '-' or '+' character, a number, and optionally
one of the following modifiers: "seconds", "minutes", "hours",
"days", "weeks", or "months".  Unique abbreviations (e.g. "s",
"mo") are also accepted. The default is "seconds".
The argument should be preceded by -u|-g and -b|-i
.TP
-r
Reset the grace period
.TP
-l NUM
Set hard limit to NUM
.TP
-q NUM
Set soft limit (quota) to NUM
.LP
NUM consists of an optional '-' or '+' character, a number (integer or floating point),
and optionally one of the following modifiers:
"Kb", "Mb", "Gb", "Tb", "bytes", or "blocks".  Unique abbreviations
are also accepted.  The default is "blocks". Modifiers are base 2 for block quotas (1k = 1024), and base 10 for inode quotas (1k = 1000)
.PP
If +/- is supplied, the existing quota is
increased or reduced by the specified amount.
.TP
.I -d
Dump quota info for user/group in a machine readable format:
.IP
                   |------- BLOCKS --------| |-------- FILES --------|
.br
.B uid/gid mountpoint current quota limit grace current quota limit grace
.IP
.B grace
is the number of seconds from now until the grace time ends. May be
negative = time already passed. When quota is not passed, grace is zero.
.TP
-n
dry-run: show what would have been done but don't change anything.
Use together with -v
.TP
-v
Verbose output. Use twice or thrice for even more output (debugging)
.TP
.I -h
Print a usage message to stdout and exit successfully
.TP
.I -V
Print version information to stdout and exit successfully
.SH FILESYSTEMS / FORMATS
On Linux,
.B quotatool
works with both "old" and "new" + "generic" kernel-quota formats and also has
support for quotas on XFS.
.SH EXAMPLES

Set soft block limit to 800Mb, hard block limit to 1.2 Gb for user mpg4 on /home:

   quotatool -u mpg4 -b -q 800M -l 1.2G /home

Raise soft block limit by 100M for non-existent gid 12345 on /dev/loop3:

   quotatool -g :12345 -b -q +100M /dev/loop3

Set soft inode limit to 1.8k (1800), hard inode limit to 2000 for user johan on /var:

   quotatool -u johan -i -q 1.8K -l 2000 /var

Set the global block grace period to one week on /home:

   quotatool -u  -b -t "1 week" /home

Restart inode grace period for user johan on root filesystem:

   quotatool -u johan -i -r /

.SH NOTES
Grace periods are set on a "global per quotatype and filesystem" basis only.
Each quotatype (usrquota / grpquota) on each filesystem has two grace periods
- one for block limits and one for inode limits.
It is not possible to set different grace periods for users on the same filesystem.

Using non-existent uids/gids like ":12345" can be useful when configuring quotas on
a mounted filesystem which is a separate system in it self, like when preparing an
install image or repairing a filesystem from another installation.

Limit arguments can be specified in several ways, these are all equivalent:
  1M
  1m
  1Mb
  1 "Mb"

Use +/- to raise/lower quotas relative to current limits

Use -v (or -v -v) to see verbose/debug info when running commands

.SH FILES
.B quota.user
,
.B quota.group
(linux)
.br
.B quotas
(solaris, ...)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Calling
.B quotatool
with more than one -v option will cause a segfault on some systems.
This will happen if vprintf (3) fails to check for NULL arguments.
GNU libc doesn't have this problem, solaris libc does.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quota (1),
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR edquota (8),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8),
.BR repquota (8)
